Happy New Year.
Good to see you all.
We are in a new message series this morning that will last us about four weeks called the generous life.
And I've been thinking about generosity and to start off this morning, I want to make a statement.
I'm not exactly an optimist.
But I do tend to try to believe the best about people, assume the best about people.
And I think I believe that most of us don't struggle with the intent toward generosity.
I think most of us struggle with priority.
Most of us don't struggle with generosity because we're selfish people intending to be selfish.
We struggle with generosity because
Let's just face it, we're human.
And we know what should come first in life, but we don't always tend to keep first things first.
Not because we reject what matters most in life, but because the urgency of life has a way of crowding out our priorities.
Pressure shows up.
A need arises to the surface and a gap opens in a deadline looms.
And slowly,
almost without noticing something important gets pushed down the list not because it stopped mattering but because something else felt more immediate and I've had this play out in my own life in ministry I don't I don't work a real job this is what my job is and I'm kidding it is a real job but
You know, I don't know if the rest of you are like me at all, but I tend to when I have my downtime, that's when I start to think about what's important, what matters, what I should be accomplishing, what my goals are, Corbin just talked about New Year's resolutions.
I try to think about goals and things like that.
And oftentimes as I'm thinking about those things, praying about them, I'll get really, really excited, really impassioned about it.
And I'm like, all right, that's where I'm going.
And one of those things that kind of comes natural for me is that I am a big believer in discipleship.
I don't know if you know this, but in Matthew 28, Jesus tells his earliest disciples, you make disciples.
It's kind of our big marching order.
We're all supposed to be about disciple making.
And so with my work in church, I tend to put disciple making first.
But over the years, I've found that as stress has a way of distorting priorities
Leadership vacuums open, pressure to fill roles increases, and before long, I find myself chasing other initiatives instead of focusing on the priority of forming disciples.
In fact, I'll even start questioning, is this even what I'm supposed to be doing, even though it is the number one marching order that Jesus gave?
And it's not because I stopped believing what was right.
but because urgency displays priority.
So if you are like me and you are a goal-oriented person or you think about what matters most to you, you might be the type of person that when the pressures of life come in, your priorities, the things that are supposed to come first get pressed downward.
And these kinds of experiences have taught me something I need to be reminded of all the time.
And that is that faith isn't just
about knowing what matters most.
It's not just about intention.
It's about guarding what comes first.
And this struggle isn't new for any of us.
It shows up right at the beginning of the biblical story.
I don't know about you, I like to read through the Bible year over year.
So I'm back in Genesis again.
And I just read through the story of Cain and Abel
Genesis 4.
And that's the story we're gonna look at today.
Because that first family, Adam and Eve, they have children.
And in this story of this first family comes the first opportunity where we see something by way of first fruits being offered.
And it's in that story in Genesis 4 where God reveals something crucial about the heart
behind what we bring to Him.
Now Genesis 4, I'm going to be honest, is not a story that's primarily about generosity.
It's a story about priority, about what we bring God, and what that reveals about who and what we trust.
So this morning I want us to go back to the beginning.
This Genesis 4 story, not to the beginning of generosity,
but the beginning of worship.
Genesis 4 introduces the first offerings ever recorded in scripture.
And what we learn in this story sets a pattern that echoes throughout the rest of the Bible.
As we go through this series called the Generous Life, we're going to trace from the beginning all the way through the New Testament story about this idea of being
But I want us to start in this story in Genesis 4.
So if you have her Bibles with you, we're going to be in the first 10 verses of Genesis 4.
I'm going to jump right in and read it now.
Says, the man Adam was intimate with his wife, Eve.
And she conceived and gave birth to Cain.
She said, I have made a man, I have made a male child with the Lord's help.
She also gave birth to his brother Abel.
Now Abel became a shepherd of flocks, but Cain worked the ground.
In the course of time, Cain presented some of the land's produce as an offering to the Lord.
And Abel also presented an offering, some of the first born of his flock, and their fat portions.
And the Lord had regard for Abel and his offering, but he did not have regard for Cain and his offering.
Cain was furious, and he looked despondent.
Then the Lord said to Cain, why are you furious?
And why do you look despondent?
If you do what is right, won't you be accepted?
But if you do not do what is right, sin is crouching at the door.
Its desire is for you, but you must rule over it.
And Cain said to his brother Abel, let's go out to the field.
And while they were in the field,
Cain attacked his brother Abel and killed him.
Then the Lord said to Cain, where is your brother Abel?
I don't know, he replied, am I my brother's guardian?
Then he said, what have you done?
Your brother's blood cries out to me from the ground.
Now Genesis tells us that Cain and Abel both brought offerings to the Lord.
Cain brings from produce from the ground, that was his work, and Abel brings from the first born of his flock, and from their fat portions, the best parts of what he had to offer.
And notice something in this story.
The text doesn't tell us that Cain brought something sinful to God.
It doesn't say his offering was illegal.
It simply says that he brought some of the produce.
Abel, on the other hand, brings the first and the best.
And this matters.
The difference isn't agricultural versus livestock.
It wasn't that one had a better job than the other.
God accepts grain offerings elsewhere in scripture to the same level that he would have accepted Abel's offering.
The difference between their offerings to God are about priority.
This passage is not teaching that God prefers one profession over another, and it's not teaching that God arbitrarily favors one person over another.
The text draws our attention to what Abel brought first.
Firstborn.
Fat portions.
Language of intentionality.
Trust.
honor and priority.
And then later in the New Testament, actually if you read the book of Hebrews, the offer of Hebrews tells us that Abel's offering was brought by faith.
Hebrews 11-4 says this, says, by faith Abel offered to God a better sacrifice than Cain did.
By faith, he was approved as a righteous man because God approved his gifts and even though he is dead, he still speaks through
his faith.
This means that Abel trusted God with what came first.
Cain brought something but not in the same posture of trust as his brother Abel.
So what Genesis is showing us isn't that worship is about what we give, it's about how and why we give, what we give.
First fruit's giving isn't about generosity as much as it is about faith.
and priority, it says that God is trusted by us with what comes next.
Abel gives in a way that acknowledges God first, and Cain gives in a way that holds something back, not necessarily out of malice, but out of hesitation.
And so what happens next, as we just read in Genesis 4, 6 or 7, is that one of the most gracious moments in the story.
God does not immediately reject Cain as a person.
He speaks to him.
Again, he says, then the Lord said to Cain, why are you furious and why do you look despondent?
If you do what is right, won't you be accepted?
But if you do not do what is right, sin is crouching at the door and its desires for you, but you must rule over it.
God is trying to tell Cain it's not to
Late.
Acceptance is still available.
Repentance is still possible.
The issue isn't the offering alone.
It's the posture behind it.
God doesn't shame Cain.
He warns him, sin is crouching at the door, but you must rule over it.
And Cain's struggle isn't greed.
It's resentment.
He doesn't just feel disappointed, he feels threatened.
And when priority slips, comparison often follows.
Love to play the comparison game.
Whether we're looking at somebody else's lesser than us, or we're looking up to somebody that we don't feel we measure up to.
And that's what Cain is doing here.
So he refuses to listen to God's warning and instead escalates the issue.
He's jealous of his brother
in God's view of his brother's actions.
So Cain said to his brother Abel, let's go out into the field.
And when they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother Abel and killed him.
And then the Lord said to Cain, where's your brother Abel?
And then he says, I do not know, am I my brother's keeper?
Am I my brother's guardian?
That's a pretty major question
in Scripture alone?
The answer ought to be yes, but Cain was more and more concerned with his own position before God and his jealousy against his brother.
And what began as misplaced worship turned into misplaced anger and eventually into violence.
And Genesis is showing us that when worship is distorted, relationships become damaged.
A heart that resists trusting God often turning and ends up turning inward or outward in destructive ways.
Happy New Year.
Now I know that this is a sobering passage to start out the New Year.
But it's not because God is harsh, but because our hearts are fragile.
And when first things slip, second things start carrying weight that they were never meant to bear.
Genesis 4 teaches us that first-fruits giving is never about earning God's favor.
It's about acknowledging God's place in our lives.
When Corbin was talking about this one New Year's resolution, keeping Jesus at the center, keeping God first, ables offering in the Genesis 4 story reflects first-fruits faith.
It keeps God as priority.
And it also shows trust that God will provide what comes next.
And Cain's offering reflects hesitation, a holding back that eventually reveals a deeper struggle of the heart.
And Genesis then shows us the danger of misaligned priorities.
It shows us what happens when trust slips up, not all at once, but subtly.
And Genesis doesn't leave us with a warning alone.
Later in scripture,
The wisdom literature of the Proverbs picks up the same theme and it says, here is how to live differently.
Here's how to keep God as priority number one.
Proverbs three, nine through 10, it says as follows, does honor the Lord with your possessions and with the first produce of your entire harvest.
Then your barns will be completely filled and your vats will overflow with new wine.
Now I know it happens when we read these Proverbs.
We like to think in terms of contract language.
If I do A, then God will come through with B.
And so we start thinking not about what we give into this situation, but we get out of it.
But I want to stop us right there.
Proverbs is not a contract.
It's not a guarantee of instant prosperity.
The prosperity gospel is a false gospel.
What Proverbs is saying in its wisdom is that God's invitation to live in reality is the way he intended and designed it.
It does not say give so God will make you rich.
It says honor God first and then trust him with what will follow after.
To honor the Lord means to treat him as weighty, as first, as central, as worthy of trust.
First fruit's giving is not about the size of the gift.
It's about the order of the gift.
In the ancient world, first fruit's offering was an act of faith.
You gave before you knew the rest of the harvest would turn out.
You acknowledge that everything belongs to God and that your future depended on Him, not your storehouses.
And wisdom says something surprising.
Giving first does not diminish the harvest.
It consecrates it.
It gives it meaning.
It declares it to be sacred.
So when Proverbs says barns will be filled and vats will overflow, it's not promising luxury.
It's describing sufficiency, stability.
God's faithful provision for a life lived and reverent trust.
Wisdom teaches that when God is honored
First, anxiety loosens its grip.
And a heart that trusts God is freer, steadier, and more generous.
Cain brought something after time passed, but Abel brought the first.
Proverbs names the difference, Genesis only shows us.
The honoring God first is an act of faith, not fear.
But even as Proverbs gives us this wisdom for living,
It also exposes a bit of a problem, because if we're honest, we don't always honor God first, or maybe I'm the only one.
Even when we want to, even when we know it's the better thing, the best thing, and that raises an important question for us.
What happens when our offerings fall short?
What happens when our faith wavers?
This is where the Bible does something beautiful.
something gracious.
It doesn't just tell us to give better offerings.
It tells us that God already gave a perfect one.
Scripture calls Jesus the first fruits.
Not just the first to rise, but the representative gift offered on our behalf.
Abel's offering was accepted because it was brought in faith.
But Jesus didn't just bring an offering.
He was the offering.
Where Cain and Abel brought gifts to God, God brought his son to us.
God did not wait to see how things might turn out before acting.
He did not give leftovers.
He did not hold back.
As Paul says in Romans, while we were still sinners, God gave us.
Jesus, Christ died for us.
And Jesus is God's first and best gift, given not when it was safe, but when it was costly, which means our giving is never about paying God back.
We don't give to earn acceptance.
We give from acceptance that he's already given us.
And we honor God with our first fruits, not because we're trying to secure His favor, but because His favor has already been secured for us in Christ.
So if we had to say all of this in one sentence, if we had to name what God is inviting us into in this generous life, it would be this, that God, that honoring God first is an act of trust that reshapes everything else in our lives.
Generosity becomes a response to grace, not a transaction to earn favor.
Worship is what we do when we make God our first priority.
We trust rather than fear.
And when we give first, we're not proving our faith, we're practicing it.
And wherever you are with generosity, there is one faithful next step.
Not to impress God, but to trust Him.
And that raises a simple, honest question for each of us.
Not how much should I give, but what does trust in God look like in my life right now?
Because I don't really want to be talking about numbers or percentages right now because we need something more clear stated at the outset.
God is not after your money.
He's after your trust.
and trust rarely grows in one giant leap.
It grows through faithful, intentional steps, sometimes small.
So to lay this out for some of us, the idea of giving a tie feels familiar.
For others, it feels overwhelming, especially if you're currently giving little or nothing at all.
So I want us to talk about this way scripture does.
As a matter of first things, not pressure.
In scripture, first fruits,
weren't about hitting a percentage before God would approve.
They were about putting God first before everything else had a claim.
Cain didn't bring nothing.
He brought something to God.
But Abel brought the first and the best in offering that was shaped by trust.
So if you're not giving anything right now, the step God may be inviting you into is not to jump
all the way up to 10%.
It's a first step, a deliberate prayerful act that says, God, I'm choosing to trust you with this part of my life.
That might mean starting with a small percentage.
If you're going from zero, you ain't going to 10.
Maybe you're going zero to one, zero to two.
But you're doing it intentionally as an act of worship.
Not to check a box,
Not to impress God, but to begin putting first things first.
Some of us give, but only when it feels comfortable, or when there's extra leftover.
Proverbs calls us to something deeper than leftovers.
It invites us to give first before the rest of the budget speaks.
And for you, the next step might be consistency.
This was my struggle point when I came to faith.
When it was easy, I did it, and when it was not
easy, I didn't.
This is an issue that took a long while for me to come around to.
And so when you're in this place, it's about consistency, choosing something and sticking to it.
It's not about perfection, but it's about intentionality and direction.
And for those of you that give regularly, even sacrificially, this passage still speaks to you.
First fruits
isn't just about what you give, but how you give, with joy, with trust, with gratitude, with open hands, as we'll see a little bit later in the New Testament.
The question isn't, am I meeting a standard?
It's, is my giving still an expression of trust, or has it become thoughtless and automatic?
No matter where you are at with this, we all need to remember this.
We do not give to earn God's blessing.
We give because Christ has already given himself fully to us.
Jesus is the true first fruit.
God gave his first and best, not after we proved ourselves, but while we were still in need.
So here's a question I want us to carry this week.
What would it look like for each of us to trust God first?
Not perfectly.
but faithfully with what he's already given us.
Now, as I said before, this is a heart matter that took me a while when I came to faith.
I came to faith as a late teenager, and I married someone that had been in the faith for a lot longer than me.
And so for my wife, this particular subject was like a non-starter.
It was like, this is what you do.
For me, it was like, this is really hard to let go of what I have.
And so when we got married, we made a commitment to give regularly in church, especially considering I was gonna go into ministry and I felt really weird asking other people to do things I wouldn't do myself.
And then 2008 hit.
Y'all remember 2008?
It feels like yesterday.
Or maybe that's because yesterday feels like 2008 because anyway, anyway, I won't get into all that.
You know, the feeling, especially after the holidays, wasn't this a great way to start?
Angie and I were still early in marriage in 2008 and the economy had shifted really hard.
We hit a recession and I remember sitting in my boss's office
at the job at the bank that I was working at.
And the company was debating whether to do layoffs or to cut people's hours back so that everyone could keep their jobs.
Either way, somebody was losing something and it just mattered, it just came down to who was going to lose more.
And suddenly everything felt tighter and less predictable.
And if I'm honest, that was the season when trusting God with giving felt hardest, not easiest.
I knew what scripture said.
I believed that God was faithful, but belief didn't erase fear.
And if you know me in my story, I am a person that deals with anxiety.
Obedience doesn't mean the questions disappear.
What I remember most clearly is the tension that was inside me at that time.
What if I give first and God doesn't come through the way that I'm hoping?
What if this ends up hurting us instead of helping us?
And yet that season taught me something I'm still learning today, especially in times like these, because 2026 feels an awful lot like 2008 to me.
Anybody agree?
When the economy feels uncertain and costs keep rising, we are still called to remember that obedience comes before peace.
Peace is wonderful, but it's fragile.
Obedience is sturdier.
I didn't feel calm when we chose to give.
I felt exposed.
I still struggle today in this moment in time with the questions I was experiencing all the way back in LA.
But looking back, I can honestly say that God proved faithful, not always in the ways I expected, not even always in the way that I hoped, but consistently faithful.
Still standing, I think.
And here's the part I want you to hear clearly.
That decision didn't make me fearless.
I don't stand here before you acting like I got it all together, because trust me, I don't.
It didn't make giving easy, but it did reshape my trust.
And even now in a season where many of us are feeling the pressure again, literally just talking to my buddy Brad,
about the pressure of the holiday season.
We just came out of it.
Everything feels unstable.
And I feel that familiar pool that I did back then.
The urge to hold tighter, to protect myself, to wait until things feel safer.
And I still have to come back to the same question.
Will I keep first things first?
because that generous life is not about the percentage, how much I give, or about how stable life feels.
It's about keeping first things first.
Will I do it?
The beautiful thing about this is that God did.
He sent his son before we made the first move.
While we were yet sinners,
So what will I do?
Not to make up for it, but in response.
Well, I keep first things first.
Each week we take communion to remember that God sent his son Jesus while we were yet sinners.
We remember God's generosity that he sent his one and only son so that we could have abundant life to the full.
And so when we take the bread and eat and we drink of the cup, we proclaim God's goodness, his grace, his generosity toward us that he sent his first fruits, the first fruit to save our lives so that we have life to the full.
So I invite you to take a moment to pause and to reflect on the goodness of God
that God made the first move so that we could respond in faith and trust.
And after that moment of reflection, we will take communion together as one church family.
I invite each and every one of you to take the bread and eat this represents his body which is given for us.
And likewise I invite you to take and drink from this cup.
This represents his blood which is poured out for us.
Please pray with me.
Dear Lord God,
Thank you for being good to us.
I thank you for being generous, for having grace, for having mercy.
And for showing us a story that's uncomfortable to read in scripture for a whole host of reasons, that raises so many questions, and really pokes and prods at not only the challenges of our life, but our frailty of faith as human beings,
But I thank you that in your gospel that you don't make our renewed relationship with you dependent on our work, but on the faithfulness of your son, Jesus, that you made the move while we were still far from you because you wanted us close to you.
And so Lord, I pray for each and every one of us, no matter where we're at in this year, where we're considering what it looks like to put you first.
We come face to face with the story and the early part of scripture.
And I pray, Lord, that you will help us to see that this is not a competition.
It's not about who's better, who's more faithful, but it's merely a conversation between
you and us, and what it looks like to put you first in all facets of our life, including the things that we might want to hold most tightly to.
So I pray for everybody in this room, myself included, that we will learn from this scripture, but more importantly, this call to keep you first will be enacted in our lives, not only here, together, but in every opportunity that we have.
We love you.
and we praise you and it's in your Son Jesus name, we pray.
Amen.